From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 96. Recorded
live Friday, January 11th, 2008. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Tellerik already controls the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms, asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks F sharp with dev
express developer, Dustin Campbell. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and I'm sitting here
in the hallowed halls of
a Kalahari resort in Sandusky,
Ohio, halfway between Toledo and
Cleveland. I'm sitting here in
the middle of the code
mash conference with Destin Campbell
fame, developer of dev express
and arch nemesis of Mark Miller.
How are you, Dustin? I'm
doing great, man. Hey, yesterday
you gave a fantastic talk
on F sharp. That was
really interesting. Thanks, man. I
really appreciate that. One of
the things that really struck
me about your talk was
that you said this is
an immense language, and you
said that at least three
times, and you had this
diagram up on the screen.
I know that we're on
a podcast, so I can't
show people a diagram and
be to blog about it.
But explain to me these
different, these different modalities that
F sharp kind of encompasses
will as sharp, where some
programming paradigms can be. You
can work with different programs,
programming paradigms in different languages,
F sharp. We're actually fully
embraces three. So functional programming
object during programming and imperative.
Alright, now what goes along
with that is, is a
massive number of features. So
you've got your functional programming
features, which are, are fully
in there, like automatic generalization
and extreme type inference, but
then you've got object oriented
features that are almost some
of these are unique to
F sharp. And on top
of that things like, you
know, compiling to mano and
standalone executable and all the
sorts of things that are
just like it's, it's, there's
a lot of features in
this language is a huge,
huge thing. You keep using
really enthusiastic adjectives. You keep
using things like immense and
extreme. You said extreme type
inference. That seems like the
X games. What is an
example of an extreme type
inference? I mean, you're, you're
pulling information from as much
context as you can from
other places. I mean, where
can you pull this context
from? Well, for example, the
operators that are being used
functions that are being used,
that within your code, within
the body of another function,
those might have some type
annotations, but the F sharp
compiler can say, you know
what? I'm not sure what
these types are, but I
can make them generic. I
know that I can make
these generic types for you.
So you might declare a
function and it might not
actually say, Hey, this, this,
this parameter is going to
be an ENT. It's going
to say, you know what?
This is going to be
the generic type parameter, a
that sort of thing. Now,
when you say generic, I
mean, I think generic, I
think, you know, angle bracket,
generics, like list of end,
is that the kind of
generic that we're talking exactly.
Yeah. Kind of generic, but
at a function level where
your function is actually declaring
generics into itself, that's some
of its parameters, we'll a
have generic type parameters Saying
that I don't know enough
that this is an end
or long, but I know
that it's going to be
some kind of a type.
So I'll just loosen up
a little bit and allow
those types to go through
exactly. Now, can you provide
it with hints? Yes. You
can apply. You can add
your own type annotations if
you need to. And sometimes
when you're writing library code,
if you're writing a public
API, that might be nice.
Maybe if you're giving out
the source code and you
know, people want to look
at this, they can, they
can see what the types
are, but generally it's, I'm
writing code. I can write
it very succinctly, not use
types and maybe like 97%
of the time. It's just,
it just gets what I
want. So what I want
is this a dynamic language?
I mean, people think of
dynamic languages as moving types
in a very liquid form.
Just kind of from here
to there. No, it's not
a dynamic language. That's very
strongly, very statically typed, but
the type inference allows you
to write in a way
that feels like that kind
of fluid dynamic language. If
I declare a variable and
the compiler, and first the
type for that variable, I
can't now go and set
that variable to another, another
value of a different type.
You can't change it to
a value of another type
of, I go and say,
let, let I equals zero.
I can't go let I
equals string. Well, it change
at all. You can't change,
but there are scoping rules
within a sharp. So you
can't actually read declare I
okay. But that's actually a
new eye. It's not the
same. I'm not actually declaring.
I'm not actually changing the
same value. So the original
variable, I write to a
new type I'm declaring a
new variable. I and any,
any, if you had a
function say that that worked
with I, if you had
a function that, that consumed
the original eye, that function
would still continue to use
the original eye with the
original type, but you'd now
if you, and then if
you read, declare I to
a new type that I
know exists for the rest
of this. Cool. Okay. So
at this point we've lost
90% of our listeners. Let
me, let me start, let
me start, let me see
if I can understand. Cause
I'm struggling to understand this
as much as I'm sure
some of the listeners are.
So if I go and
I say, let, this is
like a, like, what I
would think of is dim.
I mean, I'm, I'm basically
just making a declaration. Sure.
Let I equals zero. And
I'm saying that there is
a name now that is
bound to the value zero,
such that when I refer
to, I later, I'm really
referring to zero, but I'm
referring to it with a
friendly name. Yes. Okay. I
get that right now. I
can't say I equals two
later. No, that seems like
a very big mental change.
I mean, you're saying that
there's really no variables. It
feels like there's only Constance.
There's not that they're constant.
In fact, it's just that
they're they're variables, but they're
immutable. Okay. So they can't
be changed unless you declare
that variable differently. For example,
you could say, let mutable,
I equals zero and now
you can then use an
assignment operator to change that.
I, so it is a
variable it's just by default
in F sharp, all variables
are immutable and it cannot
change. Okay. And that sounds
like, that sounds like a
hassle. It is kind of
a hassle. If you, if
you, if you're wanting to
program in that, if you're
used to that old imperative
style of programming that we've
been indoctrinated with since, since
Fortran, right? So if you're,
if that's what makes you
comfortable, then we will feel
a bit of a hassle
at first. But once, once
you get used to it,
once you get used to
the idioms of, of a
more functional style of programming,
it, it, it becomes very
nice. So there's an interesting
contrast here. You're pointing out
very explicitly that there's the
imperative style of programming, what
you referred to as the
Fortran style. And then there's
the functional style, which is,
I assume from the list
world. And these are, I
think there are a lot
of people out there. A
lot of people would it
be of my generation or
younger who just never learned
lisp in college. They just,
they skipped that part because
imperative programming has been so
fundamental to everything that we've
done. Can you, can you
talk a little bit about
those differences? I mean, what
is, what really is a
difference in functional programming and
imperative programming? You made a
good point that really it
comes from lisp, right? Really
it's if you think about
it, the two oldest programming
languages in widespread use, which
would be Fortran and lists
are really kind of the
mother languages, right. List being
the mother language of functional
programming, Fortran being the mother
language of, of what became
C and then C based
languages like Java and C
sharp and all of our
imperative languages, but what makes
these languages different is that
list while it was trying
to solve math problems, it
would start from the mathematical
symbols. That's where it started.
And then it moved downwards
and added abstractions below it.
Whereas Fortran started kind of
with the numbers and it
grew up where it's edit
obstructions on top. And that's
what we live with today.
What really makes these, I
think the words that, that
the kind of buzzword. So
I hate using them in
one sense, but the words
that really just kind of
describe what these are doing
is that lisp was more
of a declarative style where
you're saying, or, or a
functional programming language to get
away from lists. So just
the functional programming languages in
general law, you to write
things in a more declarative
way, saying this is what
I want done as opposed
to an imperative style, which
is more like a recipe.
Like you're a chef and
you're, you've got a list
of instructions that you want
to follow step by step
and say, this is how
I want this done. This
is exactly what I want
the process to do the
steps that I want you
to go through to do
it. And in a functional
programming language, you do the
opposite. You say, this is
what I want you to
do. And I really don't
care how it happens. Okay.
So that's really, that's a
really good description. I'm going
paraphrase that cause you kind
of blown my mind there.
So a functional programming environment
is where you're basically saying
that, you know, here are
some, here's the state of
affairs as I know them
initially. And here's a description
of what my ultimate goal
is. Go ahead and get
on that, work that out
start and not concerned if
it's, if it's recursion or
if it's a big old
loop or whatever, you just
make it happen and call
me when it's done. Yes.
And then in the imperative
format, we start out with
some beginning state as again,
as we did before. But
then we say very, very
explicitly all of the state
changes that we're going to
go through in order to
get something done. And it's
completely up to us to
decide how that gets done.
And sometimes that how is
outside of the scope of
the problem itself? And we
may not know the best
way yes. To do that.
You had a recursive function
add that took X and
Y and then just added
one and returned. And you
wrote it in C sharp.
And then you tried to
add like 38,000. Yeah. One
plus one plus one, and
you were cursed and you
move the stack, very nasty
exception to have happen. And
not only did you blow
the stack, but you took
a long time to do
it because the stack got
really big. I mean, there
was a huge 37,000 deep
stack, but when you did
it in F sharp, you
wrote the, basically what I
perceived to be the same
recursion, but it happened instantly.
It didn't blow the stack.
Was there no stack? Is
there no, is there no
spoon? Is there no spoon
there wasn't, there was no,
the way F sharp compiler
took, took a look at
that, a bit of recursive
code. It could see that
the very last thing that
was done by the function
was to call itself and
it's called tail recursion. That's
what the tail means. It
means it's the very last
thing that happens. And it
took that and it was
able to say, well, if
all I'm going to do
is go back to the
front of this ma this
function again, then all that
I need to do is
turn this into a wild
loop. And that's what happens
in an, in a talk,
in a session we, we
brought up reflect when we
took a look at the
C sharp code compiled exactly.
As I'd written it, you
know, when we looked at
it with, with reflector, and
then we looked at, looked
at the F sharp code
in using the C-sharp decompiler
and we saw that while
loop. And so it really
happened almost instantaneously. Cause it
was just, it was just
increments and detriments within a
while loop. Is that a
feature of the language or
a feature of the compiler?
I mean the C sharp
compiler is getting very, very
smart. There's a lot more
method in lining. And some
tail, there is some tail
call optimization in the jitter
of the CLR, but apparently
not enough to have spotted
that issue and fixed it.
Sure. So is this a
feature of the language and
the sense that, that, that
kind of optimization has been
brought up into the language
back and said that this
is something that we'll handle
this as an optimization that's
appropriate or is this just
at the F sharp compiler
is just so smart. Well,
it's, it's, it is more
of a language thing because
functional programming in the abstract
language is so built upon
is becomes, it's such a
natural fixture, an idiom that's
used that it really is
part of the language. So
even if you do things
that you would think, well,
this isn't a tale recurs
of situation, where you do
co recursion, what's called COVID
version where you have one
function that calls another function.
And that function calls the
first function and back and
forth to solve a problem.
F sharp will still handle
that using IRL instructions appropriate.
It'll, it'll manage to get
that so that it won't
stack overflow. So it's really
part of the language. It's
trying very hard. You know,
you can, you can get
there, you can get there
and get a stack overflow.
But if you, if you
follow kind of these functional
programming, idioms of tail recursion,
that sort of thing, F
sharp, we'll pick that up
for you and allow you
to do these kinds of
things without overflows. No Often
when I'm writing a C-sharp
code or what I would
think of as classic imperative.net
languages. I find myself thinking
about how things are going
to look at runtime. I
find myself thinking, well, here's
what I'll be in the
stack at this point. And,
you know, maybe recursion is
appropriate here, but I don't
think recursion is something that
a, you know, unless you're
calling fine control. I don't
think that Joe, a.net developer
necessarily pulls recursion out of
his pocket every five minutes.
But it seems like with,
with a functional programming language,
like of sharp, where you
can't change a variable, then
you would need to use
recursion. Cause you had to
put stuff somewhere. Yes. So
you need to modify that
variable. If you're, for example,
with ad the way it
works, we have two parameters,
X and Y. And when
we Recurse, we call, we
call add again, decrementing X
and incrementing Y so we
call it with one less
and one more on each
parameter. And by the time
we get, when X equals
zero, then we know that
Y is the final result
and that's kind of how
recursion works. You're going to
take an accumulative value at
the end. And when things
are immutable like that, you're
exactly right. So in functional
programming, an F sharp, one
of the structures that's used
most Austin often is a
list singly linked list. And
that's a recursive data structure
and it has to be
dealt with using recursion. It
has to be when you
operate on it, you have
to use recursion to build
up new lists, to operate
on a list. You manipulate
your manipulations on the original
list, produce a new list.
And you build that up
through recursion using the same
kind of technique where you
have a parameter that's going
to accumulate the result. That's
interesting. So a list is
not a system, not collection
site list. This is a,
an F sharp, specific thing.
It's not a list that
I iterate over. I'm recursing
over it. You get what
I'm saying? Am I, can
I for loop over this
over these lists? I'm sure
Provide some structures that look
like that, But that's not
what's happening. Okay. Yeah, Because
a, an F sharp list
is, is it's, it's a,
it's a beautiful structure really.
Cause it's, it's, it's a
recursive structure where a list
is really simply just a
head and a tail it's
like value and then the
rest of the list. But
that rest of the list
is another list with a
value and the rest of
the list. And so on
all the way down to
the very end and where
there's a little marker called
the empty list. That ends
it. See, this is interesting.
I keep thinking about computer
science class, because you're talking
about things that, I mean,
really honestly, when was the
last time a C sharp
programmer who wasn't in academia
had to whip out a
singly link list. Yeah. It
just doesn't. I mean, it
happens and I'm sure that
there'll be, I'll get, I'll
get an email from listeners.
It'll say, okay, man, I
do this all the time.
But when you look in
system dot collection, that wasn't
the first thing that doubly
linked lists and singly. This
were not the first things
that leap out of the
collections. It's mostly just, here's
a chunk of memory. And
here's how we're going to
think about it. Sure. But
today in programming and C-sharp
three, we don't have it.
We don't use a singly
linked list per se. We
use something we use IEnumerable
of T, which is essentially
the same things and iteration
structure that is used in
link in a very similar
way to way to the
way that an F sharp
list would be used. It's
interesting. I didn't think about
that because my next question
was going to be, has
F sharp kind of come
out of nowhere and because
it includes cause it included
non-functional paradigms. Cause we, at
the beginning of the talk
here, I was asking you
about how you threw up
this diagram that said functional
and an object oriented and
imperative. And then you drew
this kind of circle around
them all and said, well,
F sharp really encompasses all
of these things. And one
of the things that I
personally feel has made functional
programming languages, less applicable to
me in my life was
that the problems I solved
didn't feel like classical functional
problems, but as this may
be one of the most
accessible languages for the.net developer,
because I can do things
in the old way, but
put my toe, I put
my toe in the pool,
I guess if I'm not
quite ready to jump in,
you know, Cannonball style, I
want to just feel around
and I could move from
paradigm to paradigm. And I
wonder if this is, are
there other languages that are
that inclusive, that broad reaching
in their style that they
would let you move kind
of comfortably from, from, Oh,
to functional to imperative, There
are others, but I I'm
I'm I'm not finding them.
Yeah. I'm, I'm really not.
The F sharp for me
is the one that that's
really spoken to me. It
really makes this the most
clear, especially with functional programming.
If you go to, you
know, for example, if you
want to try and learn
functional programming and go to
a language like Haskell, that's
what I learned thing. Right?
So, you know, it's a
very language and there, there
are certain things that are
forced upon you, whereas an
F sharp, like we said
earlier, yes, you can, your,
your variables are immutable by
default, but it's fine to
go ahead and declare a
mutable value as well because
F sharp does embrace imperative.
Programming allows you approach to
programming an imperative style as
well. If you, if that's,
what's, what's comfortable to you,
hopefully as you get, get
more comfortable with a language,
you'll do that less, but
we won't fall back so
much on, on, on that
kind of old, older, older
style, thinking that that's more
comfortable to you. This is
a very inclusive language. You
know, we had Robert Pickering
on the show who wrote
an F sharp book a
couple of months ago. And
he pointed out that one
of the things that was
attracted to him, that it
allows you to have significant
white space Yes. Or not.
Yes. And that, Or not
part was really interesting because
it's, it's unusual for me.
I would think that a
language could provide a, a
choice like that languages are
always so dogmatic, you know,
here's how we do things
in Scott Sharp. And, you know,
if you don't like that,
well, phooey on you, but
here's a language that said
that here's a religious issue
that, you know, it's almost
like don't eat pork, but
if you do, here's some
wonderful recipes And it's that
way. An audit, joining a
programming too, with F sharp,
I'm finding as I, as
I, as I do Oop
style code in F sharp
I'm writing design patterns, I'm
coding them in very different
ways than I would have
in a language like Java
or C sharp. For example,
you just made it a,
I mean, a really good
example of giving you the
options there, but not saying
here's what you have to
do F sharp supports implementation,
inheritance, right. But implementation, inheritance
has some baggage and overhead
associated with it. When you,
when you descend from a
class you're, you're essentially making
a more complex object a
lot of the times. And
so, so implementation appearance can
be the cause of some
problems in object models that
become riddle objects, models become
brittleness sort of thing. So
F sharp allows you to
do implementation inheritance, but it
downplays it. And it gives
you another language feature called
object expressions, which allow you
to take, say an abstract
class or an interface, and
just instantiate it, giving it
its members, giving it the
implementations that you want at
the time that you instantiate
it. So instead of actually
having to go out and
declare something and declare some
descendant or implementer of something,
you can just, you can
just, just construct it right.
There Is interesting because it's,
it's not a language that
is looking down on you.
If you try to do
something, it's saying that this
is you can do this.
And rather than making you
feel guilty about it, they
simply provide an alternative method
that if you find more
attractive, we would encourage you
to use. So it's a
very friendly language. It's a
very friendly language, But it's
also, it's a research language.
So when I said it
was immense, part of that
is that it just keeps
getting more features that some
of which are very experimental.
So it it's, it's, it's,
it's a, it's a very
friendly language in the one
sense. And the other sense
it's, it's very large. It
seems like if you, if
you looked at all the
features in a big list,
it would be very daunting.
So my talk earlier was
about trying to start a
little bit, trying to start
smaller with it and, and
build from there. It's a
good topic, starting small with
F sharp. Yeah. That's our
topic today. Now, This is
interesting. When you say it's
immense, are you saying it
is immense in its feature
set or is it immense
in the sense that it's
going to use a lot
of those, if I hold
down shift and start pushing
funky swear word, looking characters
at the top of the,
the numbers row of my
keyboard, that it's going to
use more of those in
a very tourist and unconscious.
No, it doesn't. It's, it's,
it's, it's actually very succinct.
I mean, a part of
that is the type inference
part of that's just flexible
syntax, but it it's immense
and its feature set. There
are, there are things that,
that I haven't touched yet.
I just haven't had the
time I'm spending time learning
how to do certain things
with a language, you know,
what solve my problem domains
at the time. And I
don't have time to look
at this other giant piece
of the language over here.
For example, like computation expressions
is something that I've not
had time to look at.
And for if there's a
Haskell listener, it's that means
that we're talking about monads
here in a sharp. I
haven't had an opportunity to
look at that. And, and
it's just, it's just immense.
One of the things that
I, I have trouble with
when I'm learning a new,
a new language, whether it
be a linguistic language, a
human language, or a programming
languages as I, I can
get the job done at
some point, but I don't
know if I said it
correctly. Someone said to me
once that if you, if
you have a friend who
says, you know, I speak,
I speak 12 languages. I
speak really well. Oh yeah.
You know, a French totally
speak French. And they say,
really, you speak French. You
should ask them how to
say, flush the toilet. And
if, if they may be
hung out in France for
six weeks on a backpacking
trip, they might say something
in French, like the bowl
of toilet, you know, the
toilet bowl with the water
pull the, you know, or
whatever. They might say, something
that kind of sounds like
and explains the process of
toilet flushing, but they don't
know the ed amatic specific
speech. And apparently in France,
it's like a pull. The
chain is the, is the
idiomatic speech that means flush
the toilet. And if you
ask in any language, they
all have a different way
of expressing that, but you
couldn't know that unless you
lived there and we knew
and worked, so people will
dance around the right way
to do that. So when
I try to learn a
new language, like I have
sharp, I can, I can
get myself, I can express
that bowl with the water,
and then it goes away
and, you know, I get
my point across, but I
don't know if I did
it. Right. Right. How do
I know in F sharp
that it, I mean, the
fact that it worked isn't
that it Was the correct
the most elegant way to
do it. Was it the
most idiomatic way to do
it? Is that what, Yeah,
I think so. And then
with, with the, with the
rise of Ruby and this
notion of the programmer aesthetic
and the language is genetic,
I feel more insecure about
my code than ever before.
I mean, that's a really
uncomfortable thing. I'll say it
again. I feel insecure about
my code more now than
before, because there seems to
be an unwieldy amount of
peer pressure on behalf of
the community, no matter what
language they have about, well,
you know, here's a better
way that you have done
that, you know, someone will
write something and then another
guy comes out with its
T sharp LINQ expression that,
you know, is like eight
characters and it's unbelievably elegant.
It doesn't feel like a
really great way to learn
a language. And certainly not
a very good way to
feel good about oneself. Sure.
How do you know when
you're learning F sharp? Because
you're, I mean, I would
say you're relatively new to
this language, right? Yeah. How
do you know that you've
got it right? That this
was the right way, that
the beautiful way do you
ask around, do you look
at examples? How can a
listener jump into this language?
Because so often you hear
people say, Oh, you haven't
Pocono with F sharp. We're
poking around with this language.
They make it a chapter
or two into a book,
but they don't really drink
deeply of the language and
learn how to say, flush
the toilet. There's a budding
community around F sharp that
will help that you can
go and you can ask
questions and you can see
examples of, of ways to
do things. I'll go to
the, the Fs hub, which
is a community server that
was set up with forums
on it, that people ask
questions, and someone will post
a bit of code and
say, Hey, what's the best
way to do this. And
then you'll get four different
responses with different styles and
different ways to do things.
And it's, it's, it's, it's
a friendly community, which is
fun. And you can, you
can, and then eventually you'll
see, one of the, even
one of the implementers of
the language will come on
and say, Oh no, here's
how I can do this
really succinctly. And that's kind
of a lot of fun.
There's, there's a, it's almost
like there's, it's, there's an
engagement of people to write
elegant, beautiful code with F
sharp and they're willing to
help each other do it.
And another resource is that
the, the F sharp source
actually ships with the language.
So you can go down
the libraries. You can look
at elegant ways to do
things the way to see
how the language is built
up. You can look at
how that F sharp list
is implemented and see that
that is, it's an essence
written in three lines of
code, for example. And it's
just, there's, there's a lot
of beauty within the libraries
themselves. Yeah. That's a very
interesting, interesting perspective. I didn't
realize that since those libraries
ship, they would be the
canonical example of a good
way to do something. Sure.
Fantastic. Well, I really appreciate
you taking the time to
sit down with me. I
know that you're missing a
session right now, and this
was really interesting stuff. Thanks.
I, I think that F
sharp is going to be
kind of the new dotnet
language. I understand it's going
to be in visual studio.
It's supported in a more
fundamental way. Are we going
to see we factoring tools
for F sharp? Perhaps I'm
a, a, that's kind of
a personal goal of mine
this year. I don't think
I can make any announcements
about things, but know that
we are looking very closely
at F sharp for code
rush and refactor support for
code, rush, and refactor. So
from dev express, so, you
know, maybe on the horizon,
you might see something there.
Fantastic new language on the
horizon. F sharp. Thank you
very much, Dustin, for sitting
down with me here at
code, man, this has been
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'll see you again
next week. .